Well it looks like we're pretty much done with the rig here.
The next thing we need to do is clean up the rig so that we only see the bones that we're going to animate
and also clean it up so it isn't so cluttered in the scene.
There are several bones here that we're just not going to use when animating now like the bones in the
legs and the bones in the arms we're just going to use the I.K. bones to move these around.
Likewise we're not going to need to see the bone for the spotlight because we're going to create another
bone out here that that is going to point to so we can control the aim of light a good way to clean
up a rig is to create custom shapes for the bones that we're going to need and want to select for animating.
So to create a custom shape let's first begin down here with this foot and what we want for the feet
is we want a custom shape for the foot control here that will allow us to select it move it around but
also will give us a sense of when the foot is planted on the ground.
I'm going to come out of pose mode and go to object mode and de-select everything.
So I want to move my pivot point or my cursor into the center of the grid here so I'll press shift s
and cursor to center and then I'm going to create a circle and I will call this shape foot
and if I select this foot bone now I'm going to select the rig and go into pose mode and select that
foot control bone right there.
If I come over here into the bone panel and if I scroll down here I can see under display a field called
custom shape.
And what I can do is I can replace this shape for that.
So the bone is still there but it doesn't look like a bone.
It looks like whatever custom shape we assign to it.
So in here like this type shape and I'll select the shape foot but we still can't see it.
The one thing you have to do is check this wireframe box.
If you check this you can now see the custom shape.
So there it is.
But it's not exactly how I would want it aligned.
What I want is I'd like this a frame.
So it's going around the foot and it's grounded down here on the grid so to move this around.
If I select this and move this around an object mode it isn't going to do anything.
But if I tab into edit mode and I'll even go into vertex mode so we can see it and I select everything.
Now as I rotate it let me turn those manipulators back on.
Now as I rotate it you can see it rotate with the custom shape.
Now it's not exactly user friendly.
This is one thing that I'm not real happy with Blendr about but it does work.
I'm going to go ahead and do this like this.
Then I'm going to come over here.
Let me go to the side view and now I need to move it.
So it rests down on the ground plane.
So I'm going to press g and see which way it looks like that's the way so I'm going to move it in the
Y and that should bring it down like so and I want it just right on the ground playing there.
And then if I drag up that doesn't do any good.
All right.
So now if I drag in the X that takes it forward and back
that goes like that so now it's kind of around the foot there.
And the last thing I want to do is scale it so that see if I can go.
I'm going to scale it.
So it's kind of oval around the foot there.
It's kind of a pain.
It really is.
But if you keep things in the center here it isn't too bad.
So now this is actually the bone.
So if I select this and press the G key and move it around that will actually be how we control the
foot.
And it's just a little cleaner than having to select a bone and we're going to hide away all of these
bones in the leg and foot into another bone layer.
So they'll be invisible.
All right let's do this for the other foot.
So if I select that other foot come over here to custom shape select the shape foot and click wireframe
there we have our control for the other foot as well.
All right.
There's one so I'm going to take this custom shape and I'm going to move it to a layer.
I want to press em and I'll move it to the layer just below here.
So all right so the next one we want to do.
How about this heel control let's work with that.
So once again with the cursor in the center of the grid press circle and this one will call shape he'll
and I'll select the heel bone here.
I'll come into custom shape type in shape and select the heel and click wireframe So now we can see
it there.
So I'll go into edit mode for this and let's try and rotate it see what we get.
That looks pretty good.
So I'll go to the side view and continue rotating this until it's 90 degrees like that.
I'll move it back.
And now I want to bin this a bit around the heel to do that I think I'll probably first have to go back
to Global transform orientation.
And I also want to change to proportional editing so I'll turn on the proportional editing tool and
what I want to do is just select maybe these two points and let me press the G key and with the brush
fairly big here.
I'm going to drag this back.
So we get kind of this curve like this.
And then maybe I'll select all of this and scale it in the next to kind to make it conform around the
heel there and then I'll move it.
Whoops.
Let me turn off proportional editing real quick.
We go and then move this forward around that heel so it just kind of fits around the heel a bit.
OK so now we got that one done.
Let's also select this one over here.
Custom shape type in shape heel and wireframe.
And now we have them for the foot and the heel.
Once again I'll press em and move this to a new layer down here.
Well let's work on the body here for this I think I want just a circle around the waist so let's go
back to object mode.
Go to the Create tab de-select everything and for this it's also create a circle.
We'll call it shape body.
I'll select that main body pose mode and for custom shape shape body wireframe.
And there it is a little big and oriented wrong.
But we can go to the side view and see if we can rotate this into place.
So if I rotate it this way Sure enough it goes like that.
That's good.
And then I'll go ahead and scale it down a bit.
And I'd like to move it to let's see which way moves it up and then we go and let's move that to a new
layer to the letter with all the others on it.
Next let's work on the I.K. hands and let's see if I can choose this.
That's the hand-on.
Well let me click it again.
There it is there's the arm I.K..
So that's the one we're going to use but I'll switch to object mode and create a circle call it shape
arm.
Go into pose mode and select that arm.
I k now come over here to the custom shape type and shape arm wireframe.
And there it is.
So I'll select the custom shape go to Edit mode.
And let's begin rotating this and seeing what we can get rotated in the x.
Yeah that looks like it might be good.
All right.
So that's in place now.
Scale it up some so we can select it.
How we go
and there's our hand or arm shape.
I'll go ahead and select this other one over here.
Arm I.K. are kind of the custom shape.
Select the arm click wireframe and there's that one so we should be able to select this.
Hit the G key and move that arm around.
I'll select this now and move it to a new lair again.
And here we go.
So for these pieces out here the knee and elbow joints What should we do about these.
I think I'd like something a little more substantial than just a circle.
Let's use a couple of circles to create a custom shape for these.
So I'll go ahead and create a circle again and I'll also duplicate it.
So press shift D and hit enter and then I'm going to rotate this around the X like this.
I mean you hit the end key to bring up the properties panel and I can see that I've got negative 60
or whatever in here.
I'll just type in 90 sort of got that and then I'll take this again and duplicate it with shift D and
enter.
And this time I'll rotate it this way around the Y 90 degrees we go.
So we've got something that looks kind of like that.
And then I'll take them all and join them together with control J.
And we go.
So now I'll call this shape joints for knees and elbows.
All right.
So that's that.
So let's try this let's select the knee joint over here in PPO's mode of course.
Come over here to custom shape type in shape and we'll use shape joints and click wireframe and there
we go.
So now I'll just scale this down a bit.
I'll go to Edit Mode make sure everything's selected and scale it down.
So it looks kind of like this.
I think that's a pretty good sign.
Should it be a little smaller.
Yeah something like that.
So now we can just select each one of these here and
give it that shape joints custom shape.